📖 developing e2e tests (#2839)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/developer/e2e.md

# Developing E2E test

E2E tests are meant to verify the proper functioning of a Cluster API management
cluster in an environment that resemble a real production environment.

Following guidelines should be followed when developing E2E tests:

- Use the [Cluster API test framework].
- Define test spec reflecting real user workflow, e.g. [Cluster API quick start].
- Unless you are testing provider specific features, ensure your test can run with

>   different infrastructure providers (see [Writing Portable Tests](#writing_portable_test)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  different infrastructure providers (see [Writing Portable Tests](#writing-portable-e2e-tests)).
```

## Prerequisites

Each E2E test requires a set of artifacts to be available:

> - Binaries & docker images for Kuberentes, CNI, CRI & CSI 

Reviewer 2: nit. typo Kubernetes

- Manifests & docker images for the Cluster API core components
- Manifests & docker images for the Cluster API infrastructure provider; in most cases
  also machine images are required (AMI, OVA etc.)
- Credentials for the target infrastructure provider 
- Other support tools (e.g. kustomize, gsutil etc.)

> The Cluster API test framework provides support for building e retrieving the manifest

Reviewer 2: nit. this needs to be deleted: "e retrieving"

files for Cluster API core components and for the Cluster API infrastructure provider
(see [Setup](#setup))

> For the remaining tasks you can find are examples of

Reviewer 2: nit. delete "are".

how this can be implemented e.g. in [CAPA E2E tests] and [CAPG E2E tests]. 

## Setup

In order to run E2E tests it is required to create a Kubernetes cluster with a 

> complete set of Cluster API providers installed. Setting up this those elements is 

Reviewer 2: nit. delete "this"

### Defining an E2E config file

The [E2E config file] provides a convenient and flexible way to define common tasks for
setting up a management cluster.

Using the config file it is possible to:

- Define the list of providers to be installed in the management cluster. Most notably, 
  for each provider it is possible to define:
  - One or more versions of the providers manifest (built from the sources, or pulled from a
    remote location).
  - A list of additional files to be added to the provider repository, to be used e.g.
    to provide `cluster-templates.yaml` files.
- Define the list of variables to be used when doing `clusterctl init` or
  `clusterctl config cluster`.
- Define a list of intervals to be used in the test specs for defining timeouts for the
  wait commands/for the `Eventually` method.
- Define the list of images to be loaded in the management cluster (this is specif of
  management cluster based on kind).

An [example E2E config file] can be found here.

<aside class="note">

<h1>Deprecated E2E config file format</h1>

The [Cluster API test framework] includes also a [deprecated E2E config file] implementation,

> that was used before the introduction of clusterctl. . This might be removed in future releases 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that was used before the introduction of clusterctl. This might be removed in future releases 
```

of the test framework.

</aside>

### Creating the management cluster and installing providers

The [InitManagementCluster method] provides a convenient way for creating a management cluster
and installing providers.

This method:
- Creates a management cluster; you can provide your own create func or use one of the 
  existing create functions: [NewCluster] and [NewClusterForCAPD].
- If supported by the management cluster type, it loads images on the management cluster,
  as defined in the [E2E config file].

> - Creates a clustercl local repository with all the providers defined in the [E2E config file].

Reviewer 2: nit. typo: "clustercl"

- Runs `clusterctl init` using the above local repository.
- Waits for the providers controllers to be running.

<aside class="note">

<h1>Deprecated InitManagementCluster method</h1>

The [Cluster API test framework] includes also a [deprecated InitManagementCluster method] implementation,
that was used before the introduction of clusterctl. This might be removed in future releases 
of the test framework.

</aside>

## Writing test specs

A typical test spec is a sequence of:

- Creating objects in the management cluster, wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be provisioned.
- Exec clusterctl operations like e.g. `clusterctl move`, wait for the action to complete.
- Delete objects in the management cluster, wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be terminated.

### Creating objects

There are two possible approaches for creating objects in the management cluster:

- Create object by object: create the `Cluster` object, then `AwsCluster`, `Machines`, `AwsMachines` etc.
- Apply a `cluster-templates.yaml` file thus creating all the objects this file contains. 

The first approaches leverage on the [controller-runtimeClient] and gives you full control, but it comes with

> some drawbacks as well, because this method does not reflec directly real user workflows, and most important

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some drawbacks as well, because this method does not reflect real user workflows, and most important
```

> the resulting tests are hardly reusable with different infrastructure providers (see [writing portable tests](#writing_portable_test)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the resulting tests are not as reusable with other infrastructure providers. (See [writing portable tests](#writing-portable-e2e-tests)).
```

> As alternative approach, you can use the [ClusterTemplate method] and the [Apply method] for creating objects in the cluster.
> This methods mimics the recommended user workflows, and it based on `cluster-templates.yaml` files that can be
> provided via the [E2E config file], and thus easily swappable when changing the target infrastructure provider.  

Reviewer: It seems we want the developer to lean towards this method of writing e2e tests. If so I suggest,
```suggestion
We recommend using the [ClusterTemplate method] and the [Apply method] for creating objects in the cluster.
This methods mimics the recommended user workflows, and it is based on `cluster-templates.yaml` files that can be
provided via the [E2E config file], and thus easily swappable when changing the target infrastructure provider.  
```

the  [ClusterTemplate method], the [ClusterctlMove method] etc.; in order to improve observability,
each clusterctl operation creates a detailed log. 

After using clusterctl operations, you can rely on the [Discovery package] and on the wait methods
defined in the [Cluster API test framework] to check if the operation completed successfully.

## Tear down

After a test completes/fails, it is required to:

- Collect all the logs for the Cluster API controllers
- Dump all the relevant Cluster API/Kubernetes objects
- Cleanup all the infrastructure resources created during the test

Those task are usually implemented in the `AfterSuite`.

### Collecting logs
Collecting all the logs for the Cluster API controllers can helps in test failures triage.

TODO

### Dumping objects
Dump all the relevant Cluster API/Kubernetes objects provide another set of useful information 
for test failure triage.

TODO

### Cleanup resources
Despite the fact that test specs is expected to delete objects in the management cluster and
wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be terminated, it can happen that the test spec 
fails before starting object deletion or that objects deletion itself fails.

> As a consequence, when scheduling you test suite, it is required to ensure all the generated

Reviewer 2: nit. "you" --> "a"

how this can be implemented e.g. in [CAPA E2E tests] and [CAPG E2E tests]. 

## Setup

In order to run E2E tests it is required to create a Kubernetes cluster with a 
complete set of Cluster API providers installed. Setting up those elements is 
usually implemented in a `BeforeSuite` function, and it consists of two steps:

- Defining an E2E config file
- Creating the management cluster and installing providers

### Defining an E2E config file

The [E2E config file] provides a convenient and flexible way to define common tasks for
setting up a management cluster.

Using the config file it is possible to:

- Define the list of providers to be installed in the management cluster. Most notably, 
  for each provider it is possible to define:
  - One or more versions of the providers manifest (built from the sources, or pulled from a
    remote location).
  - A list of additional files to be added to the provider repository, to be used e.g.
    to provide `cluster-templates.yaml` files.
- Define the list of variables to be used when doing `clusterctl init` or
  `clusterctl config cluster`.
- Define a list of intervals to be used in the test specs for defining timeouts for the

>   wait commands/for the `Eventually` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  wait and `Eventually` methods.
```

- Define the list of images to be loaded in the management cluster (this is specif of
  management cluster based on kind).

An [example E2E config file] can be found here.

<aside class="note">

> <h1>Deprecated E2E config file format</h1>

Reviewer 2: `h1` tag looks larger than `###` and I think we want to put this deprecated config under `### Defining an E2E config file`

Author: this is an `h1` into an `aside` tag, not a top level `h1` (the preview looks as you are expecting)

> The [Cluster API test framework] includes also a [deprecated E2E config file] implementation,

Reviewer 2: We need to add `// Deprecated` command for this struct?

Author: yes please, it seems I forgot to do this when doing the framework re-shuffle

that was used before the introduction of clusterctl. This might be removed in future releases 
of the test framework.

</aside>

### Creating the management cluster and installing providers

In order to run Cluster API E2E tests, you need a Kubernetes cluster; the [NewKindClusterProvider] gives you a 
type that can be used to create a local kind cluster and pre-load images into it, but also existing clusters can
be used if available.

Once you have a Kubernetes cluster, the [InitManagementClusterAndWatchControllerLogs method] provides a convenient
way for installing providers.

This method:
- Runs `clusterctl init` using the above local repository.
- Waits for the providers controllers to be running.
- Creates log watchers for all the providers

<aside class="note">

> <h1>Deprecated InitManagementCluster method</h1>

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above. Instead of `<h1>`, `####` may be more suitable here.

Author: same

that was used before the introduction of clusterctl. This might be removed in future releases 
of the test framework.

</aside>

## Writing test specs

A typical test spec is a sequence of:

- Creating a namespace to host in isolation all the test objects
- Creating objects in the management cluster, wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be provisioned.
- Exec operations like e.g. changing the Kubernetes version or  `clusterctl move`, wait for the action to complete.
- Delete objects in the management cluster, wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be terminated.

### Creating Namespaces

The [CreateNamespaceAndWatchEvents method] provides a convenient way to create a namespace and setup
watches for capturing namespaces events 

### Creating objects

There are two possible approaches for creating objects in the management cluster:

- Create object by object: create the `Cluster` object, then `AwsCluster`, `Machines`, `AwsMachines` etc.
- Apply a `cluster-templates.yaml` file thus creating all the objects this file contains. 

The first approaches leverage on the [controller-runtime Client] and gives you full control, but it comes with

> some drawbacks as well, because this method does not reflect directly real user workflows, and most important

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
some drawbacks as well, because this method does not reflect directly real user workflows, and most importantly,
```

We recommend using the [ClusterTemplate method] and the [Apply method] for creating objects in the cluster.
This methods mimics the recommended user workflows, and it is based on `cluster-templates.yaml` files that can be
provided via the [E2E config file], and thus easily swappable when changing the target infrastructure provider.  

<aside class="note">

<h1>Tips</h1>

If you need control over object creation but you want to preserve portability, you can create many templates
files each one creating only a small set of objects (instead of using a single template creating a full cluster).

</aside>

After creating objects in the cluster, use the existing methods in the [Cluster API test framework] to discover
which object was created in the cluster so your code can adapt to different `cluster-templates.yaml` files.

Once you have objects references, the framework includes methods for waiting for the corresponding
infrastructure to be provisioned, e.g. [WaitForClusterToProvision], [WaitForKubeadmControlPlaneMachinesToExist].

### Exec operations

> You can use [Cluster API test framework] methods to modify Cluster API objects, or as a last resource, use 

Reviewer 2: as a last option?

the [controller-runtime Client].

The [Cluster API test framework] includes also methods for executing clusterctl operations, like e.g. 
the  [ClusterTemplate method], the [ClusterctlMove method] etc.; in order to improve observability,
each clusterctl operation creates a detailed log. 

> After using clusterctl operations, you can rely on the [Discovery package] and on the wait methods

Reviewer 2: We no longer have discovery package.

you useful methods for those tasks.

Please note that despite the fact that test specs are expected to delete objects in the management cluster and
wait for the corresponding infrastructure to be terminated, it can happen that the test spec 
fails before starting object deletion or that objects deletion itself fails.

As a consequence, when scheduling/running a test suite, it is required to ensure all the generated
resources are cleaned up. In Kubernetes, this is implemented by the [boskos] project.

## Writing portable E2E tests

A portable E2E test is a test can run with different infrastructure providers by simply
changing the test configuration file.

Following recommendations should be followed to write portable E2E tests:

- Create different [E2E config file], one for each target infrastructure provider, 
  providing different sets of env variables and timeout intervals.   
- Use the [InitManagementCluster method] for setting up the management cluster.
- Use the [ClusterTemplate method] and the [Apply method]
  for creating objects in the cluster using `cluster-templates.yaml` files instead
  of hard coding object creation.

> - Use the [Discovery package] to discover what object was created in the cluster

Reviewer 2: Discovery package no longer exist.
